README.md, before:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tonegas/nnodely/main/imgs/logo_white_info.png" alt="logo" >
</p>

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/tonegas/nnodely/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/tonegas/nnodely?branch=main)


<a name="readme-top"></a>
## Model-structured neural network framework for the modeling and control of physical systems

Modeling, control, and estimation of physical systems are fundamental to a wide range of engineering applications. 
However, integrating data-driven methods like neural networks into these domains presents significant challenges, 
particularly when it comes to embedding prior domain knowledge into traditional deep learning frameworks. 
To bridge this gap, we introduce *nnodely* (where "nn" can be read as "m," forming *Modely*), 
an innovative framework that facilitates the creation and deployment of Model-Structured Neural Networks (MSNNs). 
MSNNs merge the flexibility of neural networks with structures grounded in physical principles and control theory, 
providing a powerful tool for representing and managing complex physical systems. Moreover, a MSNN thanks to the reduced
number of parameters needs fewer data for training and can be used in real-time applications.

### Why use nnodely

The framework's goal is to allow the users fast modeling and control of a any mechanical systems using 
a hybrind approach between neural networks and physical models.

The main motivation of the framework are to:
- Modeling, control and estimation of physical systems, whose internal dynamics may be partially unknown;
- Speed-up the development of MS-NN, which is complex to design using standard deep-learning framework;
- Support professionals with classical modeling backgrounds, such as physicists and engineers, in using 
data-driven approaches (but embedding knowledge inside) to address their challenges;
- A repository of incremental know-how that effectively collects approaches with the same purpose, i.e. building an
increasingly advanced library of MS-NNs for various applications.

The nnodely framework guides users through six structured phases to model and control physical systems using 
neural networks. It begins with **Neural Models Definition**, where the architecture and dynamics of the MSNNs are 
specified. Next is **Dataset Creation**, preparing the data needed for training and validation. 
In **Neural Models Composition**, models are integrated to represent complex systems also including a controller if is needed. 
**Neural Models Training** follows, optimizing parameters to ensure accurate representation of the target system or a part of it. 
In **Neural Model Validation**, the trained models are tested for reliability. 
Finally, **Network Export** enables the deployment of validated models into practical applications. nnodely support
a Pytorch (nnodely independent) and ONNX export.

<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#settingstarted">Getting Started</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#basicfunctionalities">Basic Functionalities</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#structuredneuralmodel">Build the structured neural model</a></li>
        <li><a href="#neuralizemodel">Neuralize the structured neural model</a></li>
        <li><a href="#loaddataset">Load the dataset</a></li>
        <li><a href="#trainmodel">Train the structured neural network</a></li>
        <li><a href="#testmodel">Test the structured neural model</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#fonlderstructure">Structure of the Folders</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#nnodelyfolder">nnodely folder</a></li>
        <li><a href="#testsfolder">tests folder</a></li>
        <li><a href="#examplesfolder">examples folder</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#license">License</a>
    </li>
  </ol>
</details>

<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
<a name="settingstarted"></a>
### Getting Started
You can install the nnodely framework from PyPI via:
  ```sh
  pip install nnodely
  ```

### How to contribute to the project
Download the source code and install the dependencies using the following commands:
  ```sh
  git clone git@github.com:tonegas/nnodely.git
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```
Give your contribution, open a pull request...

Or create an issue...
 
<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="basicfunctionalities"></a>
## Basic Functionalities
<a name="structuredneuralmodel"></a>
### Build the structured neural model

The structured neural model is defined by a list of inputs by a list of outputs and by a list of relationships that link the inputs to the outputs.

Let's assume we want to model one of the best-known linear mechanical systems, the mass-spring-damper system.

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tonegas/nnodely/main/imgs/massspringdamper.png" width="250" alt="linearsys" >
</p>

The system is defined as the following equation:
```math
M \ddot x  = - k x - c \dot x + F
```

Suppose we want to estimate the value of the future position of the mass given the initial position and the external force.

In the nnodely framework we can build an estimator in this form:
```python
x = Input('x')
F = Input('F')
x_z_est = Output('x_z_est', Fir(x.tw(1))+Fir(F.last()))
```

The first thing we define the input variable of the system.
Input variabiles can be created using the `Input` function.
In our system we have two inputs the position of the mass, `x`, and the external force, `F`, exerted on the mass.
The `Output` function is used to define an output of our model.
The `Output` gets two inputs, the first is the name of the output and the second is the structure of the estimator.

Let's explain some of the functions used:
1. The `tw(...)` function is used to extract a time window from a signal. 
In particular we extract a time window of 1 second.
2. The `last()` function that is used to get the last force applied to the mass.
3. The `Fir(...)` function to build an FIR filter with the tunable parameters on our input variable.

So we are creating an estimator for the variable `x` at the instant following the observation (the future position of the mass) by building an 
observer that has a mathematical structure equal to the one shown below:
```math
x[1] = \sum_{k=0}^{N_x-1} x[-k]\cdot h_x[(N_x-1)-k] + F[0]\cdot h_F
```
Where the variables $N_x$, and $h_f$ also the values of the vectors $h_x$ are still unknowns.
Regarding $N_x$, we know that the window lasts one second but we do not know how many samples it corresponds to and this depends on the discretization interval.
The formulation above is equivalent to the formulation of the discrete time response of the system
if we choose $N_x = 3$ and $h_x$ equal to the characteristic polynomial and $h_f = T^2/M$ (with $T$ sample time).
Our formulation is more general and can take into account the noise of the measured variable using a bigger time window.
The estimator can also be seen as the composition of the force contributions due to the position and velocity of the mass plus the contribution of external forces.

<a name="neuralizemodel"></a>
### Neuralize the structured neural model
Let's now try to train our observer using the data we have.
We perform:
```python
mass_spring_damper = Modely()
mass_spring_damper.addModel('x_z_est', x_z_est)
mass_spring_damper.addMinimize('next-pos', x.z(-1), x_z_est, 'mse')
mass_spring_damper.neuralizeModel(0.2)
```
Let's create a **nnodely** object, and add one output to the network using the `addModel` function.
This function is needed for create an output on the model. In this example it is not mandatory because the same output is added also to the `minimizeError` function.
In order to train our model/estimator the function `addMinimize` is used to add a loss function to the list of losses.
This function takes:
1. The name of the error, it is presented in the results and during the training.
2. The second and third inputs are the variable that will be minimized, the order is not important.
3. The minimization function used, in  this case 'mse'.
In the function `addMinimize` is used the `z(-1)` function. This function get from the dataset the future value of a variable 
(in our case the position of the mass), the next instant, using the **Z-transform** notation, `z(-1)` is equivalent to `next()` function.
The function `z(...)` method can be used on an `Input` variable to get a time shifted value.

The obective of the minimization is to reduce the error between
`x_z` that represent one sample of the next position of the mass get from the dataset and 
`x_z_est` is one sample of the output of our estimator.
The matematical formulation is as follow:
```math
\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n} (x_{z_i} - x_{{z\_est}_i})^2
```
where `n` represents the number of sample in the dataset.

Finally the function `neuralizeModel` is used to perform the discretization. The parameter of the function is the sampling time and it will be chosen based on the data we have available.

<a name="loaddataset"></a>
### Load the dataset

```python
data_struct = ['time','x','dx','F']
data_folder = './tutorials/datasets/mass-spring-damper/data/'
mass_spring_damper.loadData(name='mass_spring_dataset', source=data_folder, format=data_struct, delimiter=';')
```
Finally, the dataset is loaded. **nnodely** loads all the files that are in a source folder.

<a name="trainmodel"></a>
### Train the structured neural network
Using the dataset created the training is performed on the model.

```python
mass_spring_damper.trainModel()
```

<a name="testmodel"></a>
### Test the structured neural model
In order to test the results we need to create a input, in this case is defined by:
1. `x` with 5 sample because the sample time is 0.2 and the window of `x`is 1 second.
2. `F` is one sample because only the last sample is needed.

```python
sample = {'F':[0.5], 'x':[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample)
print(results)
```
The result variable is structured as follow:
```shell
>> {'x_z_est':[0.4]}
```
The value represents the output of our estimator (means the next position of the mass) and is close as possible to `x.next()` get from the dataset.
The network can be tested also using a bigger time window
```python
sample = {'F':[0.5, 0.6], 'x':[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29, 0.30]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample)
print(results)
```
The value of `x` is build using a moving time window.
The result variable is structured as follow:
```shell
>> {'x_z_est':[0.4, 0.42]}
```
The same output can be generated calling the network using the flag `sampled=True` in this way: 
```python
sample = {'F':[[0.5],[0.6]], 'x':[[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29],[0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29, 0.30]]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample,sampled=True)
print(results)
```

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="fonlderstructure"></a>
## Structure of the Repository

<a name="nnodelyfolder"></a>
### nnodely folder
This folder contains all the nnodely library files, the main files are the following:
1. __activation.py__ this file contains all the activation functions.
2. __arithmetic.py__ this file contains the aritmetic functions as: +, -, /, *., ^.
3. __fir.py__ this file contains the finite inpulse response filter function. It is a linear operation without bias on the second dimension.
4. __fuzzify.py__ contains the operation for the fuzzification of a variable, commonly used in the local model as activation function.
5. __input.py__ contains the Input class used for create an input for the network.
6. __linear.py__ this file contains the linear function. Typical Linear operation `W*x+b` operated on the third dimension. 
7. __localmodel.py__ this file contains the logic for build a local model.
8. __ouptut.py__ contains the Output class used for create an output for the network.
9. __parameter.py__ contains the logic for create a generic parameters
10. __parametricfunction.py__ are the user custom function. The function can use the pytorch syntax.  
11. __part.py__ are used for selecting part of the data. 
12. __trigonometric.py__ this file contains all the trigonometric functions.
13. __nnodely.py__ the main file for create the structured network
14. __model.py__ containts the pytorch template model for the structured network

<a name="testsfolder"></a>
### Tests Folder
This folder contains the unittest of the library in particular each file test a specific functionality.

<a name="examplesfolder"></a>
### Examples of usage Folder
The files in the examples folder are a collection of the functionality of the library.
Each file present in deep a specific functionality or function of the framework.
This folder is useful to understand the flexibility and capability of the framework.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="license"></a>
## License
This project is released under the license [License: MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

Commit message:

Added to the readme the link of the application

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tonegas/nnodely/main/imgs/logo_white_info.png" alt="logo" >
</p>

[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/tonegas/nnodely/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://coveralls.io/github/tonegas/nnodely?branch=main)

<a name="readme-top"></a>
## Model-structured neural network framework for the modeling and control of physical systems

Modeling, control, and estimation of physical systems are fundamental to a wide range of engineering applications. 
However, integrating data-driven methods like neural networks into these domains presents significant challenges, 
particularly when it comes to embedding prior domain knowledge into traditional deep learning frameworks. 
To bridge this gap, we introduce *nnodely* (where "nn" can be read as "m," forming *Modely*), 
an innovative framework that facilitates the creation and deployment of Model-Structured Neural Networks (MSNNs). 
MSNNs merge the flexibility of neural networks with structures grounded in physical principles and control theory, 
providing a powerful tool for representing and managing complex physical systems. Moreover, a MSNN thanks to the reduced
number of parameters needs fewer data for training and can be used in real-time applications.

### Why use nnodely

The framework's goal is to allow the users fast modeling and control of a any mechanical systems using 
a hybrind approach between neural networks and physical models.

The main motivation of the framework are to:
- Modeling, control and estimation of physical systems, whose internal dynamics may be partially unknown;
- Speed-up the development of MSNN, which is complex to design using standard deep-learning framework;
- Support professionals with classical modeling backgrounds, such as physicists and engineers, in using 
data-driven approaches (but embedding knowledge inside) to address their challenges;
- A repository of incremental know-how that effectively collects approaches with the same purpose, i.e. building an
increasingly advanced library of MSNNs for various applications.

The nnodely framework guides users through six structured phases to model and control physical systems using 
neural networks. It begins with **Neural Models Definition**, where the architecture of the MSNNs are specified. 
Next is **Dataset Creation**, preparing the data needed for training and validation. 
In **Neural Models Composition**, models are integrated to represent complex systems also including a controller if is needed. 
**Neural Models Training** follows, optimizing parameters to ensure accurate representation of the target system or a part of it. 
In **Neural Model Validation**, the trained models are tested for reliability. 
Finally, **Network Export** enables the deployment of validated models into practical applications. nnodely support
a Pytorch (nnodely independent) and ONNX export.

<!-- TABLE OF CONTENTS -->
<details>
  <summary>Table of Contents</summary>
  <ol>
    <li>
      <a href="#settingstarted">Getting Started</a>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#basicfunctionalities">Basic Functionalities</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#structuredneuralmodel">Build the structured neural model</a></li>
        <li><a href="#neuralizemodel">Neuralize the structured neural model</a></li>
        <li><a href="#loaddataset">Load the dataset</a></li>
        <li><a href="#trainmodel">Train the structured neural network</a></li>
        <li><a href="#testmodel">Test the structured neural model</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#fonlderstructure">Structure of the Folders</a>
      <ul>
        <li><a href="#nnodelyfolder">nnodely folder</a></li>
        <li><a href="#testsfolder">tests folder</a></li>
        <li><a href="#examplesfolder">examples folder</a></li>
      </ul>
    </li>
    <li>
      <a href="#license">License</a>
    </li>
  </ol>
</details>

<!-- GETTING STARTED -->
<a name="settingstarted"></a>
### Getting Started
You can install the nnodely framework from PyPI via:
  ```sh
  pip install nnodely
  ```

### Applications and use cases
The application of nnodely in some additional use cases are shown in 
https://github.com/tonegas/nnodely-applications.

### How to contribute to the project
Download the source code and install the dependencies using the following commands:
  ```sh
  git clone git@github.com:tonegas/nnodely.git
  pip install -r requirements.txt
  ```
Give your contribution, open a pull request...

Or create an issue...
 
<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="basicfunctionalities"></a>
## Basic Example
<a name="structuredneuralmodel"></a>
### Build the neural model

The neural model, is based of a model-structured neural network, and is defined by a list of inputs by a list of outputs and by a list of relationships that link the inputs to the outputs.

Let's assume we want to model one of the best-known linear mechanical systems, the mass-spring-damper system.

<p align="center">
<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/tonegas/nnodely/main/imgs/massspringdamper.png" width="250" alt="linearsys" >
</p>

The system is defined as the following equation:
```math
M \ddot x  = - k x - c \dot x + F
```

Suppose we want to estimate the value of the future position of the mass given the initial position and the external force.

In the nnodely framework we can build an estimator in this form:
```python
x = Input('x')
F = Input('F')
x_z_est = Output('x_z_est', Fir(x.tw(1))+Fir(F.last()))
```

The first thing we define the input variable of the system.
Input variabiles can be created using the `Input` function.
In our system we have two inputs the position of the mass, `x`, and the external force, `F`, exerted on the mass.
The `Output` function is used to define an output of our model.
The `Output` gets two inputs, the first is the name of the output and the second is the structure of the estimator.

Let's explain some of the functions used:
1. The `tw(...)` function is used to extract a time window from a signal. 
In particular we extract a time window of 1 second.
2. The `last()` function that is used to get the last force applied to the mass.
3. The `Fir(...)` function to build an FIR filter with the tunable parameters on our input variable.

So we are creating an estimator for the variable `x` at the instant following the observation (the future position of the mass) by building an 
observer that has a mathematical structure equal to the one shown below:
```math
x[1] = \sum_{k=0}^{N_x-1} x[-k]\cdot h_x[(N_x-1)-k] + F[0]\cdot h_F
```
Where the variables $N_x$, and $h_f$ also the values of the vectors $h_x$ are still unknowns.
Regarding $N_x$, we know that the window lasts one second but we do not know how many samples it corresponds to and this depends on the discretization interval.
The formulation above is equivalent to the formulation of the discrete time response of the system
if we choose $N_x = 3$ and $h_x$ equal to the characteristic polynomial and $h_f = T^2/M$ (with $T$ sample time).
Our formulation is more general and can take into account the noise of the measured variable using a bigger time window.
The estimator can also be seen as the composition of the force contributions due to the position and velocity of the mass plus the contribution of external forces.

<a name="neuralizemodel"></a>
### Neuralize the structured neural model
Let's now try to train our observer using the data we have.
We perform:
```python
mass_spring_damper = Modely()
mass_spring_damper.addModel('x_z_est', x_z_est)
mass_spring_damper.addMinimize('next-pos', x.z(-1), x_z_est, 'mse')
mass_spring_damper.neuralizeModel(0.2)
```
Let's create a **nnodely** object, and add one output to the network using the `addModel` function.
This function is needed for create an output on the model. In this example it is not mandatory because the same output is added also to the `minimizeError` function.
In order to train our model/estimator the function `addMinimize` is used to add a loss function to the list of losses.
This function takes:
1. The name of the error, it is presented in the results and during the training.
2. The second and third inputs are the variable that will be minimized, the order is not important.
3. The minimization function used, in  this case 'mse'.
In the function `addMinimize` is used the `z(-1)` function. This function get from the dataset the future value of a variable 
(in our case the position of the mass), the next instant, using the **Z-transform** notation, `z(-1)` is equivalent to `next()` function.
The function `z(...)` method can be used on an `Input` variable to get a time shifted value.

The obective of the minimization is to reduce the error between
`x_z` that represent one sample of the next position of the mass get from the dataset and 
`x_z_est` is one sample of the output of our estimator.
The matematical formulation is as follow:
```math
\frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n} (x_{z_i} - x_{{z\_est}_i})^2
```
where `n` represents the number of sample in the dataset.

Finally the function `neuralizeModel` is used to perform the discretization. The parameter of the function is the sampling time and it will be chosen based on the data we have available.

<a name="loaddataset"></a>
### Load the dataset

```python
data_struct = ['time','x','dx','F']
data_folder = './tutorials/datasets/mass-spring-damper/data/'
mass_spring_damper.loadData(name='mass_spring_dataset', source=data_folder, format=data_struct, delimiter=';')
```
Finally, the dataset is loaded. **nnodely** loads all the files that are in a source folder.

<a name="trainmodel"></a>
### Train the structured neural network
Using the dataset created the training is performed on the model.

```python
mass_spring_damper.trainModel()
```

<a name="testmodel"></a>
### Test the structured neural model
In order to test the results we need to create a input, in this case is defined by:
1. `x` with 5 sample because the sample time is 0.2 and the window of `x`is 1 second.
2. `F` is one sample because only the last sample is needed.

```python
sample = {'F':[0.5], 'x':[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample)
print(results)
```
The result variable is structured as follow:
```shell
>> {'x_z_est':[0.4]}
```
The value represents the output of our estimator (means the next position of the mass) and is close as possible to `x.next()` get from the dataset.
The network can be tested also using a bigger time window
```python
sample = {'F':[0.5, 0.6], 'x':[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29, 0.30]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample)
print(results)
```
The value of `x` is build using a moving time window.
The result variable is structured as follow:
```shell
>> {'x_z_est':[0.4, 0.42]}
```
The same output can be generated calling the network using the flag `sampled=True` in this way: 
```python
sample = {'F':[[0.5],[0.6]], 'x':[[0.25, 0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29],[0.26, 0.27, 0.28, 0.29, 0.30]]}
results = mass_spring_damper(sample,sampled=True)
print(results)
```

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="fonlderstructure"></a>
## Structure of the Repository

<a name="nnodelyfolder"></a>
### nnodely folder
This folder contains all the nnodely library files, the main files are the following:
1. __activation.py__ this file contains all the activation functions.
2. __arithmetic.py__ this file contains the aritmetic functions as: +, -, /, *., ^.
3. __fir.py__ this file contains the finite inpulse response filter function. It is a linear operation without bias on the second dimension.
4. __fuzzify.py__ contains the operation for the fuzzification of a variable, commonly used in the local model as activation function.
5. __input.py__ contains the Input class used for create an input for the network.
6. __linear.py__ this file contains the linear function. Typical Linear operation `W*x+b` operated on the third dimension. 
7. __localmodel.py__ this file contains the logic for build a local model.
8. __ouptut.py__ contains the Output class used for create an output for the network.
9. __parameter.py__ contains the logic for create a generic parameters
10. __parametricfunction.py__ are the user custom function. The function can use the pytorch syntax.  
11. __part.py__ are used for selecting part of the data. 
12. __trigonometric.py__ this file contains all the trigonometric functions.
13. __nnodely.py__ the main file for create the structured network
14. __model.py__ containts the pytorch template model for the structured network

<a name="testsfolder"></a>
### Tests Folder
This folder contains the unittest of the library in particular each file test a specific functionality.

<a name="examplesfolder"></a>
### Examples of usage Folder
The files in the examples folder are a collection of the functionality of the library.
Each file present in deep a specific functionality or function of the framework.
This folder is useful to understand the flexibility and capability of the framework.

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>

<a name="license"></a>
## License
This project is released under the license [License: MIT](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

<p align="right">(<a href="#readme-top">back to top</a>)</p>
